Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Michael Cholby. He's professor
and personal chair in philosophy at the University of
Edinburgh. He has published widely in ethical theory, practical
ethics, and the philosophy of Deaf and Dying. And
today we're going to talk about the philosophy of
death and dying. So Doctor Cholby, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure for me and I appreciate the
invitation.
So let me start with perhaps uh an introductory
question. So what is the philosophy of death and
dying? What kinds of topics and questions do you
explore there?
Well, almost every, uh, philosophical tradition in the world,
Western, uh, non-Western, Asian, etc. uh, EVENTUALLY comes to,
uh, the question of, of what significance or importance
we should assign to our deaths and to the
fact that we are mortal. Um, YOU know, it's
a question entertained by, you know, Socrates and Confucius
and, and so many, um, illustrious figures in the
history of philosophy. Uh, I suppose, um, some of
the questions that we entertain in philosophy of death
and dying could be thought of as metaphysical questions,
just what is death? When does it occur? Uh,
IS there any prospect that we might survive it?
Um, MANY of the questions that we undertake, I
suppose, are, um, ethical questions insofar as they're questions
about the prudential significance of death, whether death could
be a harm to us, uh, whether there's, uh,
anything about death that might merit fear or some
other emotion. Um, AND then, of course, there's many
questions that, uh, are arguably, uh, moral questions, questions
about, um, exactly what makes, um, you know, killing,
uh, morally objectionable, and that, of course, encompasses both,
uh, the killing of others, but also self-killing, suicide.
Um, I think when you look into the literature
that philosophers have produced on the, on, uh, death
and dying, You know, it, it extends in quite
a few directions. Um, YOU know, people have been
exploring in recent years, you know, questions at the
intersection of death and dying and technology, whether there's
some sense in which, uh, we could, uh, uh,
cheat death through certain kinds of technologies, avoid it,
uh, or perhaps soften the blow by, um, creating,
uh, you know, digital avatars of ourselves that our
descendants and so forth could interact with and sort
of keep us alive in their inner subjective world.
Um, AND of course, you know, um, Uh, whenever
you're talking about death and dying, questions of medical
ethics are also, you know, um, uh, in the,
uh, atmosphere as well. So, it's quite a broad
field with a very long history, and it's, and
it's very vibrant right now too.
Great, so let's explore some of those questions then.
What is death? How is it defined?
Well, this is one of the contentious issues in
our field. I suppose the straightforward answer is simply
to say that uh death is the condition in
which uh a person no longer exists. Uh, BUT
of course, that's doesn't seem quite right since, um,
you know, if you happen to believe that there's
an afterlife, you still believe that we die, and
yet, you know, we, we somehow managed to survive
death. So I suppose the starting place, which, uh,
that almost everyone agrees to is that death is
that fact or event wherein, um, we come to
no longer be alive in a biological sense, um,
but there are, uh, uh, even beneath that, a
good many, uh, disputed questions. There are those who
think that when we think about death, we should
be thinking about death primarily in terms of the
cessation of our consciousness, that perhaps what it is
to die is to no longer be a conscious
being. Others who think, um, uh, that death should
be thought of, uh, as, uh, the cessation of
certain kinds of functions we have as organisms, so,
uh, the functioning of our brains or perhaps the,
uh, cardiopulmonary activity, the, the, the, uh, circulation of
our blood, the, the aspiration of, of oxygen, and
others who think that the relevant fact, uh, to,
uh, point to when thinking about death is one
might think of as a loss of personhood, sort
of the loss of Um, perhaps not conscious awareness,
but sort of a sense of oneself as existing
across time. Um, YOU might think that in a
certain way, um, there, uh, to, to not have,
uh, memories of one's past selves, or not be
able to, uh, think about one's future is in
a sense to die, uh, uh, according to some.
So, it's one of the contentious issues, uh, within
the philosophy of death and dying, how to characterize
the nature of death, and that in turn has
ramifications for uh how death, uh, criteria, right, are
understood within medicine. Whether we should think that someone
dies, you know, when a certain, uh, threshold of
brain activity is met, or whether we should certainly,
uh, whether we should think that death is simply
the cessation of your conscious awareness. So, um, there's
sort of easy answer, right? That's sort of the
cessation of our existence, but after that, there aren't
too many easy answers.
So, is that good or bad for us, and
how do we approach such a question?
Well, I think there's an array of views that
philosophers have held here. A good starting point is
the view that was advocated by the ancient Epicurean
philosophers. They argued that um death is neither a
harm nor a benefit to us, uh, because if
in fact it is the cessation of our existence,
then there won't be uh anything to it, right?
To, to, to quote Epicurus himself, death is nothing
to us. It's not a condition in which we
exist. Um, AND so there's nothing harmful or beneficial
about being in that condition. Um, MORE contemporary philosophers,
I think, are, are drawn to the idea that
the harms or perhaps benefits of death are not
to be thought of in terms of what it's
like to be dead, right? But rather what, uh,
impact death has on the duration and quality of
your life. So, a prominent view, which with I,
with which I'm pretty sympathetic, is known as comparativism
or deprivationism about death's value. And that view essentially
says that to think about whether or not someone's
death at a given time is good or bad
for them, you compare the life that they, uh,
realize, right, by dying at that time, to the
longer life they would have had if they'd survived
further, right? So we're comparing sort of an actual
life to a counterfactual life that a person would
have had if they'd survived longer. And the thought
is that the, uh, death is a harm to
you, just in case, had you lived longer, you
had a better and longer life, or uh it's
a benefit to you if, uh, had you lived
longer, uh, you would have been worse off, your
life would have been on balance, not as good
for you. Um, I think that that's a pretty
attractive position in part because it seems to me
that we should Um, begin from the presumption that
probably it isn't true that death is always bad
for us, and probably it isn't true that death
is always good for us. Probably, it's good or
bad, depending upon the circumstances and the timing of
it. And so, I think that comparativeist view gives
us a pretty good handle on on how that
could be, right? Uh, YOU know, your, your death
is good or bad for you, depending on when
it happens, and then sort of what would have
happened to you, had you not died when you
did.
Would the immortality be good for us?
Well, this is uh a question that's been much
disputed in recent years. Um, I think those who
think that immortality would be good for us, uh,
are apt to say, well, it gives us more
opportunity to enjoy the goods of life. Um, I
point out in one of my articles that, that
also means it's more opportunity to face the bads
of life. And so one has to think about
whether or not, uh, uh, the, the future one
would have, which would be infinitely long if we
were truly immortal, would be one that contains enough,
right, of the goods, uh, uh, to outweigh the
potential bads. The argument that I think has been
um most influential amongst philosophers in terms of thinking
about this, is an argument due to um the
British philosopher Bernard Williams, who argued that the ultimate
problem with immortality is that somehow we would ultimately
find it tedious or boring, right? We would run
out of endeavors or pursuits that are um, uh,
sufficiently attractive to us to make us think that
it'd be good to, to be alive forever. Um,
NOT all philosophers have accepted, uh, Williams's argument. It's
in fact, one of the most, uh, disputed arguments
in our field. Uh, BUT it set a lot
of the agenda, right? It certainly got a lot
of people thinking about whether or not Um, it
would be desirable, right, to face a future that
was infinitely long. Uh, I've come to the conclusion
actually that probably it'd be good for some and
bad for others, right? Some people have trouble fill,
filling up, you know, 70 or 80 years of
their lives, uh, with worthwhile activities, and so, you
know, living a billion years doesn't sound, uh, like
a, a welcome prospect for them. But others, uh,
you know, seem to find, uh, no end of,
of exciting possibilities for their lives. And so, you
know, for them, immortality could well be a boon.
Mhm.
So let me ask you about suicide now. Is
it best approached as a moral question, a psychological
question, or a medical question?
Well, I think in contemporary, uh, you know, sort
of advanced industrial societies, um, suicide is mostly treated,
uh, or addressed through, through a medical lens, right?
It's thought of in terms of, uh, what, uh,
physicians and, and clinical personnel, uh, think about, you
know, a person's mental state and, and whether they're
going to, um, you know, uh, in their lives
and what should be done about that. Um, I
think that's in many ways a kind of mistake.
This isn't to say that medicine doesn't have a
role in thinking about suicide, but it's clear that
it's a, a question that, um, has, uh, facets
to it that aren't maybe best addressed, right, through,
through medical means. It's not a medical question whether
your life, uh, your future is going to be
meaningful. It's not a medical question whether, um, You
know, uh, you can withstand additional pain and suffering,
and so forth. Those aren't, you know, sort of
questions of medicine, those are questions, broadly speaking, of,
of philosophy or ethics. Um, So, I mean, I
think it's a, it's a multifaceted question to which
um many different fields have a contribution to make.
Um, THE moral question, you know, has been entertained,
uh, in philosophy, you know, essentially forever. Um, YOU
know, when you think about the famous, um, you
know, scene of, of Socrates facing his own death,
uh, you know, in, in the Phado, he's in
effect, you know, deciding whether it's kind of morally
defensible for him to, uh, acquiesce, right, in this
suicide that it's been handed down as a judicial
sentence, right? Um, SO, it's been on the minds
of, of people for quite a long time. Uh,
AND the moral question has, uh, been approached, you
know, through different kinds of lenses, um, you know,
theological, you know, in terms of our relationship to
God, say, um, utilitarian in terms of sort of
questions about well-being, but also, you know, um, considerations
such as, uh, you know, uh, a person's autonomy,
right? Whether they have a right to decide the
duration of their lives. That's been an important, um,
element of the conversation too.
Is suicide rationally or morally defensible?
Uh, IT can be. Um, AS always, I think
we should, uh, suppose that, uh, universal claims should
be treated with skepticism here, right? That, that it
would always be rational or morally defensible, or never
rationally or morally defensible. Those seem to me to
be, um, pretty unlikely, uh, hypotheses just at the
outset. But I think it can be rational for
people to think that they would be better off,
right, for having a shorter rather than a longer
life. Um, This isn't going to be true for
much of people's lives. Probably throughout most of our
lives, we do stand to benefit from living further.
Um, BUT there can come points in people's lives,
where it seems, um, that it would be rational
for them to prefer a shorter rather than a
longer life. I think that's an important, um, consideration,
right? Because, uh, you know, sometimes you hear people
describe suicide or assisted dying as, as choosing death.
And I like to point, point out to people
that's, um, quite confused in a way, right? Because,
you know, we are mortal creatures, we will die
at some time. And so the person who's opting
for suicide or for assisted dying, say, isn't deciding
to die, they're deciding to die earlier, right? And
that I think is, is a crucial observation. In
terms of the moral defensibility of it, um, that's
a huge conversation. Um, A useful way, I think,
to, to divide things up, uh, to kind of
get a handle on it is, is to use
the approach that David Hume used in a famous
essay of his on suicide. Uh, Scottish philosopher David
Hume, where he said, well, you know, if there's
something morally objectionable about suicide, that's going to be
for one of three reasons. One is that it
violates duties that we owe to God. Uh, SECOND,
that it, uh, violates duties that we owe to
other people or to society at large. Or third,
that it violates duties that we owe to ourselves.
Um, I find it difficult to see in any
of those lines of argument. Um, ARGUMENTS that are
so compelling to show that suicide could never be
morally defensible, but I think the arguments sometimes put
their finger on important reasons why we should certainly
be hesitant about suicide from a moral perspective.
Is the meaningfulness of life a relevant question as
to whether it is rational to commit suicide?
I think it's um more relevant in some ways
than, than many people come to appreciate. I think
when we look at the um literature about suicide,
the research literature on suicide, the research literature on
assisted dying, what you often uh uh see, I
think, is an underappreciation of how it is that
considerations of meaningfulness play a pretty prominent role, right,
in, um, people's decisions regarding whether to, uh, continue
their lives. So, for example, in the conversation around
assisted dying, people tend to assume that um People's
reasons for wanting assisted dying, uh, have to do
primarily with, um, problems related to like physical pain,
right? So, physical pain associated with, you know, let's
say, a disease like cancer. But in reality, right,
when you look at people's reasons for seeking this,
a lot of what seems to be on their
minds is the sense that they're not able to
do the kinds of things that are sources of
meaningfulness in their lives. They're not able to communicate
fully with others, they're not able to appreciate certain
kinds of experiences. They're not, uh, mobile, right? So
they can't, you know, uh, enjoy different environments that
might otherwise be afforded them. So, I think that
meaningfulness and, and the desire for meaningfulness plays a
more prominent role in people's thinking around um suicide
than uh uh many researchers and many members of
the public appreciate. I think people will put up
with quite a lot of discomfort, pain, suffering, even
if they feel that their lives hold out the
prospects of meaningfulness. So, I think that it, it
should, um, get more attention in the conversation around
suicide and assisted dying than it tends to get.
Yeah, I'm going to ask you about the assisted
dying in a bit, but first, are people allowed
or should they be allowed to kill themselves?
Well, here, I think, uh, again, uh, I would
be wary about a categorical answer. I do think
there's a lot to be said for the simple
thought that, um, you know, we're brought into the
world without any, uh, without our consent, right? We
sort of exist, not because, uh, uh, any of
us decided upon it. Uh, WE'RE, we're here because
somebody else decided upon it. And it does seem
like it should be viewed as a fundamental right
to decide how long we're going to be here,
right? Uh, uh, AFTER all, you know, um, our
lives are most centrally our own, right? My life
matters the most to me, your life matters the
most to you. Uh, IF anyone has a right
to, uh, decide that their, uh, life should be
shorter rather than longer, it should be the individual
whose life it, it is. Um, THAT said, you
know, I think that societies have some interest in
making sure that, um, people, uh, make that decision.
Um, WITH some care or consideration, right? Uh, THAT,
the idea that we should at least make it
available to people to, uh, you know, seek out
the kind of, uh, medical care, pastoral care, maybe
philosophical care, uh, that they might need in order
to really think this decision through, seems to me
to be wise. After all, this is a pretty
momentous decision. If you, um, you know, end up,
um, ending your life due to suicide, it, it's
a one-time deal, right? You can't, you know, reverse
it. So, it's a fairly momentous choice. And societies
also, I think, face important choices about um how
easy or difficult, right? They want to make, um,
uh, self-determination, right? Um, SO clearly, uh, you know,
one of the things that drives, um, the prevalence
of suicide within societies is how readily available different
kinds of, you know, technologies, uh, are, right? So,
uh, clearly, for example, all the research seems to
suggest that Uh, the easy availability of, of guns,
right? Seems to, you know, increase the prevalence of,
of suicide within a society. I think societies have
important questions, uh, that they should ask themselves about
how easy or difficult they want to make this.
Uh, JUST to give another example, here in the
United Kingdom in the 1950s, um, you know, the
government began to phase phase out the production of,
um, ovens, right? Uh, THAT produced coal gas, right,
which is toxic, right? If you inhale it. And,
you know, these were phased out, and the suicide
rate, you know, went down. And I think that's
probably a welcome development. Probably we shouldn't want there
to be in most people's homes, you know, a
relatively easy sort of suicide technology, uh, like that.
Uh, SO those are the kinds of questions that
I think are on the agenda, uh, you know,
in terms of whether people should be allowed to
do it. I, I, I tend to, you know,
think that there is something quite powerful to the
thought that You know, the right to die is
a credible notion, right? If there's anybody who has
the right to decide the duration of your life,
it's, it's you.
Right. How do questions surrounding autonomy connect to suicide?
Well, um, I think there's a couple of aspects
to, uh, the relationship between autonomy and suicide. So,
um, there's one point of view, uh, germinating out
of Kant that, uh, actually says that the fact
that we are autonomous beings, uh, is an argument
for the moral impermissibility of suicide, right? Kant seemed
to have argued that the very fact that we
are autonomous beings lends us a certain kind of
value, dignity was his term for that, uh, value.
Uh, WHICH in turn entails that we are not
to, uh, treat ourselves as just a kind of
instrument of our own interests, right? To sort of
discard our, our lives when we think that, uh,
our lives are no longer going well enough or
won't go well enough. But another aspect of, of
the relationship between autonomy and suicide is that, again,
in terms of preventing suicide, uh, it does seem
relevant whether or not someone's uh opting to end
their life in a way that is autonomous. Whether
they've really, you know, considered, um, you know, the,
the, the evidence and, and reasons, right, that speak
for and against their continuing their lives. I mean,
I think we can all agree that there are
cases where we would think that someone's ending their
life would be hasty, uh, would not be autonomous,
and that, you know, people would have a good
reason to want to interfere or intercede. Uh, YOU
know, the, the adolescent, right, who's, um, just heartbroken
by their first romantic breakup, right? Uh, YOU know,
um, sadly, sometimes people do in their lives subsequent
to that sort of event, but you definitely want
to say to such a person, You know, it
will be OK. People do survive this. It, it
may seem difficult in the moment, but a measure
of patience and, and recognition from others will probably
allow you to Uh, you know, uh, get over
this and, and live, you know, a, a life
that you can be happy with. So, uh, I
think we do want to, you know, ensure that,
um, people, uh, are, uh, opting to end their
lives in ways that are rational and well-informed, which
is sort of the heart of autonomy. Though of
course, we can also go overboard there. I think
it's possible for us to, um, overshoot the mark
trying to determine whether, uh, someone's, um, Suicide is
autonomous and, and subject them to um excessive burdens,
right? In terms of trying to demonstrate to the
world that they're choosing uh to die in a
way that's autonomous. Uh, I would say, for example,
that the, um, assisted dying bill that actually was
just passed in the House of Commons here in
the United Kingdom is an example of, of something
that's too burdensome. Uh, IT involves a, a panel,
right, of psychiatrists and social workers and judges approving,
right, requests for assisted dying. And this looks to
me to be, um, not only very cumbersome, but
an example of, uh, overshooting the mark in terms
of uh determining whether or not people are making
their decisions autonomously. It looks gratuitous to me.
Mhm. On what grounds is suicide intervention justified?
I suppose the most common one, right, is paternalistic,
right? That we think people are making some sort
of mistake, right? Uh, AND they're not just making
a mistake, um, innocently, right? They're making a mistake
because they, uh, lack the evidence needed to, to
make this determination rationally, or they're perhaps subject to
some sort of, um, you know, mental condition, perhaps
a mental illness of some sort, that's distorting their
thinking. Um, So, I think that the most common
rationale that people offer is the paternalistic one that,
you know, people's deciding in some cases to end
their lives. Well, they're making a genuine decision, but
not the decision, sort of decision that um uh
others must respect, right? Uh, AND when we think
that someone is uh making not merely a, a
modest mistake, but a very serious mistake about their
well-being, Um, and they're doing so in ways that
are perhaps ill-informed, or again, uh, insufficiently autonomous. Perhaps
that can provide grounds for, um, intervening. Um, I
should say that in general, right, my, my leanings
on these matters is to, is that, uh, we
overemphasize when it comes to suicide prevention, trying to
identify who is likely to engage in suicide, um,
predicting, right, uh, who amongst Uh, you know, a
large group of people with, let's say, depression or
bipolar disorder are likely to end their lives with,
um, uh, due to suicide, is actually extremely difficult,
right? Uh, YES, lots of people who, uh, in
their lives due to suicide have those kinds of
conditions, but the, the, uh, the correlation is rather
weak in the other direction. Most of the people,
uh, overall majority of people who, who are depressed,
etc. DO not. Um, And I would be in
favor actually of our beginning to rethink the ethics
of suicide intervention to uh de-emphasize, right? Trying to
identify who is suicidal, uh, and put more emphasis
on trying to create environments, right? Um, THAT, uh,
Discouraged, right? To the extent we think that people
ought to be discouraged, um, from engaging in suicide.
So, to give an analogy, Craig Bryan in a
recent book of his, um, he's a psychologist working
in the United States, uh, you know, makes a
nice sort of comparison that when we think about,
you know, uh, roadway safety, right? We don't think
first and foremost about who are the good drivers,
who are the ones who are likely to get
in accidents and who's not. We think rather about,
you know, is this curve dangerous? Is this, you
know, intersection well lit, and so forth. And I
think that idea or that kind of picture of
how we should approach suicide intervention in a more
systematic or social way, kind of public health approach,
is, I think, likely to be no less effective,
but also doesn't involve us trying to figure out,
right? You know, just who amongst all those who
might be depressed or might have suffered personal setbacks
or might have, you know, uh, you know, uh,
uh, uh, devastating personal illnesses, that sort of thing.
Uh, We can move away from this approach of
trying to identify who is suicidal and simply uh
try to make it the case that it's perhaps
a little more difficult for people to engage in
suicide.
Right. So let me ask you a little bit
about assisted dying now. What questions does it raise?
Well, it raises many of the questions that we've
already touched upon. Can people, you know, decide to
end their lives rationally, autonomously? What reasons might they
have, reasons of, uh, you know, well-being, but also
reasons around meaningfulness. I do think the meaningfulness point
is, is again worth emphasizing there. I suppose traditionally,
right, when people think about assisted dying, they're thinking
about assisted dying, um, as facilitated by, uh, doctors,
right, through medical means, um. And that, you know,
I suppose puts on the agenda questions about whether
assisted dying is compatible with the ethical norms that
define medicine. Um, ONE, you know, long-standing argument against
assisted dying, against euthanasia, uh, is that, uh, it
should be a cornerstone principle of medical ethics that
doctors do not kill or assist in the killing
of their patients. Um, NOW, that argument, I think
has been subjected, uh, to a good bit of
criticism. Much of it strikes me as convincing criticism,
uh, insofar as, uh, the point here seems to
be that, that doctors should not, um, contribute to
the killing of their patients when the killing is
not consensual, or when the killing is not a
benefit to the patient, but on the condition that
the patient does consent and, uh, is benefited by
it, perhaps that's a case where we should make
an exception. Um, THERE are also, I suppose, questions,
uh, within medicine around the, uh, sort of distribution
of healthcare resources. Um, YOU know, many of those
who might seek assisted dying, for example, uh, are
seeking it toward the end of their lives, which
is typically a period where, uh, people are, um,
subjected to a great deal of, uh, medical attention
and medical intervention. Much of that medical attention intervention
is, is costly. Uh, IT could perhaps be used
to, um, help people who, uh, you know, uh,
have different medical conditions or who might stand to
benefit more. So it raises questions around, um, the
distributive justice, right, of, of healthcare resources.
So many advocates for a moral right to assist
the dying hold that individuals are entitled to death
with dignity. What does dignity mean in this context?
Well, dignity is one of those terms that everyone
likes, but no one can seem to agree quite
on what it is. Um, SO you hear that
notion invoked both, as you just said, right, by
advocates of assisted dying, but also by opponents of
assisted dying. So, that then raises the puzzle, well,
you know, how could it be that dignity speaks
both for and against assisted dying. Um, I find
that deeply puzzling, um, It seems to me that
it seems very clear then that the, the, uh,
different parties are using the term to designate different
kinds of notions. Uh, AND I'm not, uh, terribly
patient with the question of sort of which of
these views is, is the right way to invoke
the notion of dignity. I think, you know, it
may just be one of those terms that has,
you know, a lot of different meanings and is
used by a lot of people to use, to,
to mean different things. I think those who favor
the legalization and availability of assisted dying, Typically have
in mind, uh, by a death with dignity, a
death that accords with a person's conception of, of
who they are and perhaps what's best about themselves.
OK. So, you know, dying nowadays is more often
the case, most often the uh uh the case,
a condition where, Uh, you know, you suffer from
different kinds of debilities, you may have, uh, difficulty
walking, sitting up, speaking, uh, hearing, seeing, you know,
caring for yourself in different sorts of ways. Um,
AND I think what people who, who want, uh,
what they think of as the death of dignity
have in mind, is that they want to be
able to die in a way that accords with
their own conception of what's valuable in their own
lives. They don't want to, you know, be dying
in a way where they sort of final moments
are at odds with Uh, their best selves, right?
They're capable selves, they're, they're selves that, uh, are
able to communicate and think and are conscious. Um,
SO they want to avoid a death, um, such
that the end of their life sort of represents,
you know, if you will, not the best of
them, but the worst of them. Right, um, And
I think that there's also a kind of interpersonal
dimension of dignity, uh, for many advocates of assisted
dying. They want to die in a condition that
is relatively speaking, relatively speaking, uh, less dependent upon
others, right? Uh, SO to die with dignity means
in their minds something like, to die before one
is completely, um, sort of at the mercy, right,
of, of your caregivers and, uh, at the mercy
of, of the medical interventions that are Uh, sort
of treating your condition and, and sustaining your life.
Um, BUT again, dignity is invoked kind of on
all sides of the debate. So in some ways,
you know, whenever I, I, you know, have conversations
about, uh, about assisted dying with people, I, I
kind of wanna sort of, you know, give a
timeout and that's just, you know, let's not talk
about dignity cause sort of everybody has their own
conception. Um, BUT it's clearly had, uh, a lot
of rhetorical, uh, significance in this debate. I mean,
a lot of the groups that, you know, advocate
for the legalization of assisted dying, that's how they
describe themselves, you know, dignity and dying, death with
dignity. So, clearly it's capturing something that people are,
uh, that resonates with many people.
Should people have the right
to die? I think they do as a moral
matter, have the right to die in the sense
that I think that um there is a limited
claim, right, um, against other people interfering, right? With,
um, our choices about the duration of our lives.
Again, you know, uh, ending one's life is, is
not the decision to die, it's a decision to
die earlier rather than later. And that's a question
that I think, um, if anybody is well situated
to make that determination, uh, it's, um, the person
whose life it is. This doesn't mean that people
always make this determination perfectly, or that we shouldn't
perhaps, um, help them make that decision better. Um,
BUT that ultimately, uh, they're the biggest stakeholder, right,
in that decision, and they are the ones who
have the most familiarity, the greatest degree of knowledge
about whether their life is, is, you know, worth
it for them. Uh, THIS doesn't mean that, you
know, we should encourage people to do it frivolously.
It also doesn't mean that we should, uh, neglect,
right, moral considerations that are germane to the decision.
Uh, SURELY, you know, if you are a parent,
uh, it should weigh very heavily on your mind
whether or not, you know, ending your life would
mean that you would end up neglecting or harming
your children. That seems to me to be a
very weighty moral consideration. Uh, YOU know, the effects
on others certainly is something that people should be,
uh, mindful of, right? In thinking about. Um, uh,
THE decision of whether or not to continue or,
or to foreshorten their lives. But I think if
the, if the question is taken just sort of
at face value, is there a right to die?
I'm inclined to say, yes, though, of course, as
with almost any right, it's not an unlimited right,
and, and it's one that should be exercised, um,
uh, very carefully and very judiciously.
So I have one last question then, are there
any situations where people have a duty to die?
Well, um, that phrase duty to die, you know,
seems to, um, uh, Light a fire in a
lot of people's minds, right? This thought that you
could ever have a duty to die. Um, SO
there are cases where I think a lot of
people would agree that, uh, you have a duty
to do something that will put your, uh, life
at risk, right? So, you know, the firefighter who
confronts a burning building, uh, and is, is asked
to, you know, remove somebody from it. Uh, THEY'RE
not intending to die, perhaps, but they're certainly, uh,
undertaking what could be a lethal risk, and you
might think in that sense, they have a duty,
perhaps not to die, but at least a duty
to, uh, put their lives at risk. Likewise, you
know, the soldier who was, uh, uh, following a
legitimate order, uh, you know, to go into battle,
to enter into combat, um, is in some sense,
you know, uh, acting on a, a punitive duty
to, if not to die, at least to risk
their lives. Um, Now, of course, you can come
up with scenarios, right, where you might think that
someone has a duty to die, um. You know,
a famous example, uh, in, in the philosophy of
death and dying literature, you know, um, again, a
military example, uh, you know, a grenade is thrown
into a foxhole, and, uh, a soldier sees that
if the grenade goes off, uh, a number of
his, uh, fellow soldiers will be killed. Uh, BUT
if he, uh, leaps upon it and absorbs the
blast into his own body, he will be killed,
but the others, um, um, The others will be
saved, right? Now, there are certain lines of moral
argument that would say, actually, you know, that's his
duty. It's not him being heroic or anything if
he were to do this. This is actually what
he's uh morally obligated to do. That's the sort
of reasoning we might associate, say, with utilitarian thinking
and morality, that we should, um, make sacrifices so
long as those sacrifices have greater benefits, right, to
other people. Um, I think the more contentious examples
of duty, of a duty to die, and, and
these are the sorts of examples that were behind,
uh, John Hardwick's, uh, quite controversial article from the
1990s is their duty to die, are situations where
a person, um, Uh, by continuing to exist is
imposing certain kinds of burdens on others, right? So,
um, a person might have a very serious illness
that, uh, requires very burdensome care on the part
of others. Or they could have a very, uh,
serious illness that imposes, uh, quite heavy financial burdens
on others. Uh, Hardwick argues in his article that,
um, Uh, there can be cases where, uh, by
continuing to exist, you are imposing unjust burdens on
other people. Um, MANY people have not been convinced
by that line of argument. I have my hesitations
over it, but I think one thing that is,
um, worth noting there, is that we should perhaps
take more seriously the idea that sometimes by dying,
we can signal what we care about, right? Sometimes
dying can itself be a, a, a morally, uh,
relevant act, right? That it can have a kind
of moral significance. And one of the ways that
it can have moral significance is in terms of
helping other people, right? You know, people, um, uh,
when they're conscientious, you know, make out a will,
you know, to make sure that other people, you
know, what to do with their belongings, and they,
and they tell people how they want their bodies
to be handled, right, after death. Um, THOSE are
altruistic acts in a certain way, and I think
what Hardwig is inviting us to ask, right, is
whether we should perhaps be more tolerant of people
wanting to act altruistically at the end of their
lives, um, in particular by, um, foregoing, right? Certain
kinds of benefits. The provision of which is very
burdensome to other people, right? I often find it
quite odd that we think that somehow in death,
uh, you know, altruism, uh, should be ruled out
and selfishness should be the norm. Um, I think
there's something laudable about, um, someone who says, well,
by continuing to live, I'm imposing, you know, these
very serious burdens on other people. Uh, AND so
by, by shortening my life, I'm relieving them of
those burdens. Whether or not they have a duty
to do so is, is more controversial, but I
think that, uh, that line of argument deserves credit
for getting us to ask a question that we
sometimes don't ask, right? Why shouldn't we think of
death as an opportunity in some sense for uh
beneficence or altruism?
Mhm. Great. So Doctor Cholby, just before we go,
where can people find your work on the internet?
Uh, WELL, one place to start is just at
my own personal website, which is at michael.holi.com. Um,
IF you're looking for, um, a very comprehensive picture,
um, the, the entry that I have at, uh,
the database fill papers will give you access to,
you know, most all of my published work. Um,
BUT I'm certainly not a stranger on the internet.
I shouldn't be too hard to find, so.
OK, great. So, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
It's been my pleasure. Always, uh, intrigued to talk
about these topics. So, thanks very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Janusertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.